# 12\. DOS

## Introduction

This chapter provides an overview of DOS and disk driver features in the HP palmtop. Some terminology that will be used in this chapter:

* DOS external commands. These are programs that come with DOS and which reside on disk and are loaded into RAM to execute just like user programs. Examples are CHKDSK and FORMAT.
* DOS Command Processor and DOS internal commands. The Command Processor is the program which provides the user interface to DOS. It prints the famous C:\> prompt and parses the user commands. It also contains the internal commands such as DIR and COPY.
* DOS kernel, which is the heart of DOS. The kernel contains the interrupt 21h handler and is device and hardware independent.
* DOS device driver layer (also known as the DOS BIOS, but not to be confused with the ROM BIOS). This layer resides between the DOS kernel and the ROM BIOS. The DOS OEM adaptation kit comes with the source for the device drivers and it is expected that OEMs may have changes to make at this layer due to unique system requirements. The DOS kernel talks to the device drivers who in turn talk to the ROM BIOS or hardware as necessary.

Historically, it was thought that OEMs would make major changes to the device drivers. But, as PCs became so standard the device drivers typically required little change and almost all the system specific changes were done in the ROM BIOS.

* ROM DOS refers to executing portions of DOS directly from ROM as opposed to reading it into RAM first. The idea is to save RAM.
* RAM Disk refers to a disk structure that is recorded in RAM. The HP palmtop family uses a special RAM disk that is "static" in that it is preserved over reboots and can be adjusted in size without reformatting.
* ROM Disk refers to a disk structure that is recorded on ROM at build time and is accessible by the user through the normal DOS file system. On the HP palmtop family the ROM disk is drive D.

## ROM DOS

The HP Palmtop uses the ROM option present in standard Microsoft DOS version 5.0. The configuration chosen for the HP Palmtop runs the DOS device drivers and the DOS kernel from ROM. The command processor has a stub in ROM, but the bulk of the command processor runs from RAM.

## Startup File Processing and Boot Options

DOS was modified to search the root directory of the A and C drives in that order for a config.sys file. If config.sys is found, that drive becomes the default drive and config.sys and any autoexec.bat is processed off that drive. If neither A nor C contains a config.sys file, D becomes the default drive and the default config.sys and autoexec.bat are processed.

The Boot options were tailored for the HP palmtop to provide for overriding this default config.sys search behavior.

## ROMed Commands

A unique feature of the ROM version of Microsoft DOS is a table of commands that DOS will search before searching the path for external commands. In order for DOS to search this ROM table the command line must not include either a drive or path.

On the HP 200LX, the set of ROM'd commands is:

* COMMAND DOS command processor
* `COMMAND.COM` DOS command processor
* $SYSMGR Brings up System Manager (for 95LX compatibility)
* 100 Brings up System Manager (for 100LX compatibility)
* 200 Brings up System Manager. There is another version on the ROM disk that also brings up the system manager, so that programs that check for existence of an actual file before running it will be able to find one. To bypass the command in DOS and execute the version on the ROM disk, you must either use the full path (D:\BIN\200), or include an extension (`200.COM`). Also, some networks are not compatible with ROM'd commands and in this case the ROM disk version is needed to launch the System Manager
* PASSWORD Global password interface

## DOS Internal Commands

The DOS command processor launches through a stub which resides in fixed mapped ROM. The stub copies the bulk of the command processor code into RAM to execute. No customization was done to the command processor, so all internal commands are the DOS 5.0 versions.

## DOS External Commands

A subset of the DOS external commands resides on the ROM disk in D:\DOS. In general these are unchanged from the standard DOS 5.0 versions. The special situations are:

* Executables were compressed with PKLITE to save ROM space.
* `COMMAND.COM` is a disk based stub for the command processor and is present for possible compatibility needs.
* `FORMAT.COM` was modified in two ways. One modification was to restrict the number of root directory entries on cards of 2MB or less to a maximum of 240. This is because there is a 240 root directory entry limit on the 95LX, which was also limited to 2MB cards, and this change will keep us from formatting a card that will not work on the 95LX. The other modification was to issue a "Format not supported" message if an attempt is made to format drive C or drive D.
* `MODE.COM` was modified so that the cursor definition used for monochrome mode would be appropriate. The standard cursor definition was for a system with more scan lines than on the HP palmtop.

## Additional DOS-like Commands

`FDISK100.EXE`, which resides in D:\BIN, is a special version of FDISK for the HP palmtop family. FDISK100 takes no arguments and it automatically operates on drive A. FDISK100 is for use with SunDisk cards only where its purpose is to create a harddisk style partition table.

## Disk Device Drivers

The standard DOS device drivers were replaced by custom drivers on the HP palmtop. The custom drivers are built into the DOS device driver layer so they are not loaded in config.sys.

### Plug-in Card Disk Driver (drive A)

The plug-in card disk driver is Microsoft CARDDRV with extensions.

CARDDRV uses the CardBIOS layer to actually read and write data, learn of card changes, etc. See the PCMCIA chapter for information on CardBIOS. CARDDRV uses drive letters A and B. Drive letter B is used for the second partition on a plug-in card, but partitions of this sort are never used in practice so drive B is never used in practice. This is not a loss since drive letter B needed to be used up somehow so that the RAM disk, which acts like the palmtop's hard disk, would be the industry standard hard disk drive C.

If a two-slot version of the HP palmtop had ever been made, it is likely that drive B would have been changed to be used for that slot.

The plug-in card disk driver as it came from Microsoft supported RAM cards and, with the help of the Flash File System drivers, supported the Microsoft FFS. The Microsoft FFS is a file system designed for "Intel-style" flash memory cards.

The fact that the Microsoft FFS did not achieve reasonable performance combined with the limited availability of Intel-style flash cards prompted the removal of the FFS drivers from the HP palmtops prior to release.

To provide a large mass storage option for the HP palmtop, CardDrv and CardBIOS were extended to provide support for the SunDisk ATA style disk drive cards.

A note on media change indications: After a power cycle, CardDrv's MediaCheck function will indicate "disk changed" to DOS. This causes problems for software which leaves open files on drive A. It would be extremely difficult if not impossible to be sure whether the disk is actually identical to the disk that was present when the unit was turned off. So, the choice for a plug-in card device driver is between saying "disk changed" or saying "don't know". Saying "disk changed" is the safe approach because if DOS has any "dirty buffers" then an invalid disk change error will prevent a write to a possibly different disk. On the other hand saying "disk changed" causes many unnecessary errors since usually the disk has not really changed. Note that saying "don't know" is not completely safe since if DOS has "dirty buffers" then DOS will go ahead and write them to the disk taking the chance that the disk was not changed (if the disk really was changed, the file structure o f the new disk may be damaged).

### RAM Disk Driver (drive C)

The HP palmtop RAM disk driver was written at HP and integrated into the DOS device driver layer so that it is built-in and consequently does not need to be loaded in config.sys.

The size of drive C can be adjusted. See the Modify RAM Disk Size, Initialize RAM Disk, and Get RAM Disk Size Parameters functions in the Int 13h section of the BIOS chapter. This is the way the RAM Disk size is altered by the Setup application.

The RAM disk driver utilizes two tables of static data, which are located at the beginning of the palmtop extended BIOS data area, which starts at 9000:f000. For completeness these tables will be described here. The word "permanent" refers to memory or sectors which are used by the RAM disk regardless of its size. The word "flexible" refers to memory or sectors in the area that may be occupied by RAM disk.

First, here are the structure and table definitions.

```
DRT_MEM_BLOCK STRUC                   ; disk resource table memory block
DRT_MEM_CHIP DB                 ?     ; chip select
DRT_MEM_START DW                ?     ; start offset in 1K units
DRT_MEM_LEN DW                  ?     ; length in 1K units
DRT_MEM_BLOCK ENDS
;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
DDT_SBT                         STRUC ; disk desc table sector block table
                                      ; common to both PERM and FLEX SBTs
DDT_START_SECTOR DW             ?
DDT_END_SECTOR DW               ?
DDT_CHIP_SELECT DB              ?
DDT_START_OFFSET DW             ?     ; in 1K byte units
DDT_SBT                         ENDS
;----------------------------------------------------------------------------
DDT_FLEX_INFO                STRUC      ; disk desc chip info which is
                                        ; special to the flex sector chips
DDT_FLEX_CHIP_BOT DW                ?   ; in 1K byte units
DDT_FLEX_CHIP_TOP DW                ?   ; in 1K byte units
DDT_FLEX_INFO                ENDS
;
;-------------- Disk Resource Table ----------------------------------------
;
             PUBLIC DRTSignature
DRTSignature DW                ?       ; "DR" in finished table
             PUBLIC      DRTPermCount
DRTPermCount DB                ?       ; num of perm sector table entries
             PUBLIC      DRTFlexCount
DRTFlexCount DB                ?       ; num of flexible sector entries
;
; Allow for 6 memory blocks to allow for 4 chips of permanent sectors
; plus two chips of flexible sectors.
;
             PUBLIC           DRTMemBlocks
DRTMemBlocks DRT_MEM_BLOCK                     6 DUP (<>)
;
; Expansion space.
;
          DB               5 DUP (?) ;
          PUBLIC           DRTChkSum
DRTChkSum dw           ?
;
          PUBLIC           DRTLength
DRTLength           EQU           $ - DRTSignature
;
;-------------- Disk Description Table -------------------------------------- ;
     PUBLIC           DDTSignature
DDTSignature DW                ?          ; "DD" in finished table
     PUBLIC           DDTLastPermSect
DDTLastPermSect DW                ?       ; last sector in bank mapped RAM
     PUBLIC           DDTLastSect
DDTLastSect DW                ?           ; last sector period
     PUBLIC           DDTNumFlexChips
DDTNumFlexChips DB                ?       ; 1 or 2 depending on 512K case
;
; Allow for 4 permanent memory blocks to allow for 4 chips.
;
     PUBLIC           DDTPermSBT
DDTPermSBT DDT_SBT    4 DUP (<>)
;
; Expansion space.
;
          DB          7 DUP (?)
;
; Allow for 2 flexible memory blocks to correspond to the two RAM chips
; in a one meg Cougar.
;
     PUBLIC           DDTFlexSBT
DDTFlexSBT DDT_SBT                2 DUP (<>)
;
; Allow for 2 flexible sector info structures which correspond to the two
; flexible memory blocks above.
;
     PUBLIC           DDTFlexInfo
DDTFlexInfo DDT_FLEX_INFO 2 DUP (<>)
;
;
; System memory size in 1K units (available below the RAM disk)
;
     PUBLIC           DDTDosMemSize
DDTDosMemSize DW      1 DUP (?)
;
; Current number of 8KB blocks of flexible sectors that are used.
;
     PUBLIC           DDTBlocksUsed
DDTBlocksUsed DW                ?
;
; Maximum number of 8KB blocks of flexible sectors that can be used.
; If this is zero, it indicates that partition moving is not supported
; as will be the case for "large" disks.
;
     PUBLIC           DDTBlocksMax
DDTBlocksMax          DW           ?
     PUBLIC           DDTChkSum
DDTChkSum DW                ?
     PUBLIC           DDTLength
DDTLength EQU         $ - DDTSignature
```

The disk resource table comes first. It starts with 'DR', ends with a word checksum, and is 29h bytes long. This table describes the RAM regions that are available for use by the RAM disk. By default this table allocates the maximum amount of RAM for use by the RAM disk. In theory, this table could be modified to save some RAM for other purposes. By way of example, here is the disk resource table from a 1MB palmtop, which has two 512KB RAM chips.

```
Location      Symbolic          Value            Comment

F000:9000     DRTSignature      "DR"               Table signature
F000:9002     DRTPermCount      01               One device with permanent sectors
F000:9003     DRTFlexCount      02               Two devices with flexible sectors

     ; permanent sector description

F000:9004     DRT_MEM_CHIP      02               Chip select 2 = NRAS[1] = 2nd RAM chip
F000:9005     DRT_MEM_START     00A0             Starts at offset 160K in chip
F000:9007     DRT_MEM_LEN       0160             352K long uses up rest of 512K chip
     ; 1st flexible sector description

F000:9009     DRT_MEM_CHIP      01               Chip select 1 = NRAS[0] = 1st RAM chip
F000:900A     DRT_MEM_START     0080             Starts at offset 128K in chip
F000:900C     DRT_MEM_LEN       0180             384K long uses up rest of 512K chip
     ; 2nd flexible sector description

F000:900E     DRT_MEM_CHIP      02               Chip select 2 = NRAS[1] = 2nd RAM chip
F000:900F     DRT_MEM_START     0000             Starts at offset 0 in chip
F000:9011     DRT_MEM_LEN       007C             124K long goes up to ext BIOS data
F000:9013 through F000:9026 unused and set to 0
F000:9027     DRTChkSum         031C             Checksum

The disk description table comes second.  It starts with 'DD', ends with a word checksum, and is 48h bytes long.  This table describes the location of the disk sectors.  By way of example, here is the disk description table for a 1MB system with the RAM disk expanded from the default 352K to 512K.  Note that the 8KB blocks are for compatibility with the HP 95LX.

Location      Symbolic          Value            Comment
F000:9029     DDTSignature      "DD"   Table signature
F000:902B     DDTLastPermSect   02BF             Last permanent sector is number 703
F000:902D     DDTLastSect       03FF             Last sector of disk is number 1023
F000:902F     DDTNumFlexChips   02               2 flex sector chips since 2 512K RAMs
     ; 1st permanent sector block table

F000:9030     DDT_START_SECTOR  0000             First sector = 0 (boot sector)
F000:9032     DDT_END_SECTOR    02BF             Last sector = 703
F000:9034     DDT_CHIP_SELECT   02               Chip select 2 = NRAS[1] = 2nd RAM chip
F000:9035     DDT_START_OFFSET  00A0             Starts at offset 160K in chip.  This
                                                 derives from 128K used for system
                                                 RAM + 32K display and font RAM.

; 2nd, 3rd, and 4th permanent tables are not used since we have only one chip holding permanent sectors.

F000:9036 through F000:9052 unused

; 1st flexible sector block table

F000:9053     DDT_START_SECTOR  02C0             First sector = 704
F000:9055     DDT_END_SECTOR    0307             Last sector = 775
F000:9057     DDT_CHIP_SELECT   01               Chip select 1 = NRAS[0] = 1st RAM chip
F000:9058     DDT_START_OFFSET  01DC             Starts at offset 476K in chip
     ; 2nd flexible sector block table

F000:905A     DDT_START_SECTOR  0308             First sector = 776
F000:905C     DDT_END_SECTOR    03FF             Last sector = 1023
F000:905E     DDT_CHIP_SELECT   02               Chip select 2 = NRAS[1] = 2nd RAM chip
F000:905F     DDT_START_OFFSET  0000             Starts at offset 0 in chip
; 1st flexible sector information table

F000:9061     DDT_FLEX_CHIP_BOT 0000             Starts at CPU address 0
F000:9063     DDT_FLEX_CHIP_TOP 0200             Ends before 512K in CPU address space
; 2nd flexible sector information table

F000:9065     DDT_FLEX_CHIP_BOT 0200             Starts at CPU address 512K
F000:9067     DDT_FLEX_CHIP_TOP 027C             Ends before 636K in CPU address space
F000:9069     DDTDosMemSize     01DC             476K System RAM
F000:906B     DDTBlocksUsed     0014             20 8KB blocks of flex sectors used
F000:906D     DDTBlocksMax      003F             63 8KB blocks of flex sectors possible
F000:906F     DDTChkSum         081B             Checksum
```

The RAM disk format is that of a standard DOS disk. The boot sector is stored in the first permanent sector and is following by the FAT and root directory in the standard fashion.

The number of sectors allocated to the FAT is sufficient to accommodate the largest size that the disk can have given the amount of RAM in the system. This means that the root directory sectors do not have to shift as the disk is expanded or contracted.

As far as the disk size is concerned, the current size is stored in the boot sector. A reboot is required after any change to the disk size so that DOS will reread the disk parameters.

The disk parameters are determined as follows (actually this is for the 200LX, but the 100LX is the same for all RAM sizes found in the 100LX):

* Sector size is always 512 bytes.
* If the disk has fewer than 4,087 sectors, then it uses a 12-bit FAT with one sector per cluster and four sectors of root directory.
* If the disk has 4,087 or more sectors but fewer than 14,336 sectors then it uses a 16-bit FAT with one sector per cluster and four sectors of root directory.
* If the disk has 14,336 or more sectors but fewer than 30,720 sectors then it uses a 16-bit FAT with two sectors per cluster and six sectors of root directory.
* If the disk has 30,720 or more sectors then it uses a 16-bit FAT with four sectors per cluster and eight sectors of root directory.

The disk driver can support disks up to approximately 32MB.

### ROM Disk driver (drive D)

The HP palmtop ROM disk driver was written at HP and integrated into the DOS device driver layer so that it is built-in and consequently does not need to be loaded in config.sys.

The ROM disk driver reads a special disk image that is prepared by a ROM disk image builder program. The ROM disk image is then placed in the ROM by the ROM image builder.

## Power Management

### The APM Specification

At the time of the HP palmtop development the Advanced Power Management (APM) specification from Intel and Microsoft was at version 1.0.

Some experiments were made implementing the full APM specification and using the DOS Power driver. While this worked, it did not seem to be a good replacement for ad hoc power management techniques which steal light sleep during keyboard checks. For one thing, `POWER.EXE` added considerable overhead to the timer tick handler.

However, there was some value in broadcasting suspend and resume events so that APM aware applications could prepare for power down. This limited support for APM is described in the next section.

### APM on the HP palmtop

The CardBIOS software (see the PCMCIA chapter) was written to be APM aware which meant that it needed to be informed about suspend and resume events. To accommodate this, a timer tick handler was added to DOS which broadcasts suspend and resume events in the APM style. This is the only part of APM which is supported.

The suspend request is posted by the BIOS and detected in the timer tick handler where the suspend request is broadcast. There are two types of suspend requests posted by the BIOS - normal suspend and software shutdown. Normal suspend would be posted when user turns the unit off or the unit times out. Software shutdown is posted in response to a low battery situation. Software shutdown can be posted either by the BIOS or by CardDrv when CardDrv is writing to a SunDisk card. See the next section for more information on SunDisk card power management.

The suspend and resume requests are broadcast via Int 2Fh calls as follows:

```
Entry: AX = 530Bh
       BL = 2 for suspend or 3 for resume
       BH = 0 or 80h if another application has rejected request

Exit: BH = 80h if application rejects request or unchanged otherwise
```

Note that LapLink Remote Access is an APM aware application which does make use of the APM suspend and resume broadcasts to provide clean disconnects and reconnects across power cycles. Thus, this limited APM support came in handy when LLRA was included on the 200LX.

### Special SunDisk card handling

SunDisk cards have high power requirements relative to the built-in palmtop components. Consequently, the BIOS software shutdown is not sufficient to keep the unit from going into backup mode when writing to a SunDisk card. Possible card corruption can result if power is lost (e.g., by going into backup mode) while writing to a SunDisk card. To prevent this from happening, extra low battery protection was built into CardDrv.

When CardDrv is writing to a SunDisk card, additional battery measurements are made before and after writing to the card. If the battery is too low to continue, CardDrv posts a software shutdown request and waits for the low battery condition to be corrected. After the system returns to operation, the write continues. In this particular case, media changes (which are normally signaled on resume) are suppressed so that the write can continue without DOS ever being the wiser.
