# 13\. PCMCIA

## Introduction

This chapter contains information on the PCMCIA card slot in the HP palmtop.

At the time this is being written, most computers have standard PCMCIA controllers and software (Card Services 2.1 and Socket Services 2.1). This means that card providers are now able to write card drivers which will run on many machines.

The HP palmtop uses a proprietary controller for simplicity in IC design and was developed before the release of the Card Services 2.x and Socket Services 2.x specifications. Since the HP palmtop does not contain standard hardware or software PCMCIA interfaces, custom software may be needed in order to use certain cards.

The goal of this chapter is to give an overview of the PCMCIA situation on the HP palmtop. Accompanying this chapter is an example program, included in the developer's kit, which shows how a card installer could be written for the HP Palmtop.

## Hardware Overview

The HP palmtop has one PCMCIA Type II Version 2 slot.

Electrically the card slot conforms to the PCMCIA 2.x standard. In particular, the hardware supports both memory and IO cards.

The PCMCIA controller in the HP Palmtop is proprietary and unique to the HP Palmtop. Documentation for the controller is contained in the Cougar System Controller chapter of this guide.

In reading the documentation, see a table near the front of the chapter for the GPIO lines that go to the card slot.

## Power guidelines

The quoted maximum power available at the card port on the HP palmtop is

* 150 mA @ 5v = 750 mW (this is on the Vcc pin)
* 60 mA @ 12v = 720 mW (this is on the Vpp pins)

where both can be active at the same time.

This value is limited by the output of the power supply and not by whether it is running on battery versus AC, although battery life would certainly be shortened by high current draws.

## 8-bit Bus

The HP palmtop uses an 8-bit bus to interface with the PCMCIA slot. This bus is shared with the internal system ROM. The system RAM chips are on a separate 16-bit bus.

The PCMCIA standard allows the host to have an 8-bit bus and provides mechanisms by which 16-bit data transfers can be done with a pair of 8-bit accesses. Note that all PCMCIA standard cards have a 16-bit bus.

To save cost, some cards (such as the HP Speller/Thesaurus ROM card) use an 8-bit bus. These cards work fine in the HP palmtop, but may not work in other systems where the PCMCIA bus is 16 bits.

## Resource Allocation Issues

This section discusses the resource allocation issues with respect to IO windows and memory windows.

IO windows are not a problem because there are two IO windows available and neither one is used except in support of an IO card in the PCMCIA slot. The modem card installer, CIC100, will allocate an IO window to modem cards. In this case the window will be at the standard COM2 location, 2F8h. Other custom card installers are free to use either or both IO windows as needed for their particular card's needs. See the CICDEMO program discussed below for an example.

Memory windows are another matter. All of the memory windows are potentially in use whenever the System Manager is running. The System Manager uses the memory windows to map application code and data, residing on the System ROM, into the address space.

This means than no memory window can be dedicated to the PCMCIA slot. Instead, applications which need memory windows to the PCMCIA slot will need to save the current window mapping, open a memory window to the card and do whatever is needed, and then restore the original window mapping before giving up control of the CPU, except for hardware interrupts. The system architecture does not allow hardware interrupt handlers to be stored in memory windows, so it is NOT necessary to disable interrupts during the time the window configuration is changed.

The Int 63h Get/Set page map functions should be used to save and restore mapping states; see the BIOS chapter. The Socket Services functions are not adequate for this purpose because Socket Services deals only with the plug-in card device while the memory windows are used by the System ROM as well.

Storage for saving the window state is provided by the application. Int 63h function AX=0103h returns the number of bytes of storage needed. For the current HP palmtops, 19 bytes are needed. For applications which can dynamically allocate memory for this purpose, it is recommended to use this function to determine the storage requirement and act accordingly. For applications which must do a static allocation, it is recommended to allocate 40 bytes and use this function to check that the allocation is sufficient.

The Int 63h Get/Set page map functions read/write the hardware bank control registers to get/set the page mapping state.

Note that if CardBIOS is used to read/write to a memory card, then it is not necessary for the application to save and restore the window state because this is done by CardBIOS.

## Software Architecture

The PCMCIA model contains the following layers:

* Client layer which is made up of card drivers which register as clients of Card Services. As clients, these drivers can be informed as cards come and go and thus be in a position to perform card recognition and configuration.
* Card Services layer which performs PCMCIA resource management functions as well as just about everything else that a client needs to do with a card. Card Services supports multiple clients and is the sole client of Socket Services.
* Socket Services layer which talks to the hardware and supports one client, which is Card Services.
On the HP palmtop, these general layers are present, but not in the form of the current standard. Specifically, the situation on the HP palmtop is:
* Client layer
* CardDrv which supports RAM cards and SunDisk cards.  
* CIC100 which supports modem cards.
* Card Services layer
* Socket Services layer

Socket Services version 1.01 is implemented on the HP palmtop. This was essentially the first version of Socket Services that was a PCMCIA standard and lasted until the major update to version 2.0.

## Built-in clients (CardDrv and CIC100)

CardDrv is a DOS disk device driver which supports RAM cards and SunDisk cards in drive A. CardDrv is a client of CardBIOS, which support CardDrv with card change events and media read/write functions. See the DOS chapter for more information on this driver.

CIC100 (Card Installation Client for the 100LX) is a modem card installer. CIC100 is a CardBIOS client, which supports CIC100 with card change events. Since CardBIOS does not support IO cards, CIC100 goes directly to Socket Services as needed.

Both CardDrv and CIC100 examine each card in response to a card insertion type event received from CardBIOS. If CardDrv recognizes the card then drive A has a disk inserted. If CIC100 recognizes the card, the card and socket are configured as COM2 and the BIOS data area at 40:2 is filled in with the address of COM2.

In response to a card removal event, CardDrv and CIC100 undo any card configuration that was previously in effect.

### CardBIOS

CardBIOS is a short name for what Microsoft called "CARDDRV BIOS Interface" dated September 15, 1992 together with some extensions made at HP.

CardBIOS is called as follows:

```
     mov      ax, b000h
     les      bx, ptr to a CardBIOS request packet
     int      1ah
```

The media types supported by CardBIOS are RAM cards, SunDisk cards, and Intel Series II flash cards. The Flash File System drivers would be needed to use the Intel flash cards and these drivers are not included in the HP palmtop.

The Microsoft specification defined the following functions:

* GetBIOSInfo
* InitializeBIOS
* UninitializeBIOS
* RegisterClient
* DeregisterClient
* ReadMemory
* WriteMemory
* CopyMemory
* RequestEraseQueueService
* GetStatus
* GetFirstRegion
* GetNextRegion

HP added the following functions:

* GetFirstTuple
* GetNextTuple
* GetTupleData
* Hook2FNow
* SetSocketBusyCallback
* GetDriveParameters
* BroadcastRequest

The InitializeBIOS function provides RAM needed by CardBIOS. This function is called by CardDrv and, since CardDrv is always the first client loaded, there is no need for other clients to be concerned with initializing CardBIOS. CardBIOS must remain active at all times so the UninitializeBIOS function should not be used.

Applications which need to watch for a specific card should register as a CardBIOS client so that they will be informed of card change events.

The CICDEMO example program, which is described more below and which is included in the developer's kit, illustrates the use of RegisterClient, DeregisterClient, GetFirstTuple, GetNextTuple, and WriteMemory (for writing to attribute memory to configure a card).

Note that one of the advantages of using the CardBIOS WriteMemory function to configure a card is that CardBIOS will take care of saving and restoring memory windows, see the Resource Allocation section above for more information on window management.

It is expected that CICDEMO will provide a sufficient illustration of CardBIOS usage for most application's needs. However, complete CardBIOS documentation is available upon request.

### Socket Services 1.01

The HP palmtop contains an implementation of Socket Services 1.01.

From Socket Services viewpoint, the HP palmtop has one adapter (number 0) and the adapter has one socket (number 1), which is the PCMCIA card slot. Socket Services has no knowledge of other devices in the system such as System ROM. This means that there are necessarily some special considerations. For example, the GetWindow function cannot return the true window state if the window is currently mapped to System ROM since System ROM is not a socket.

The Socket Services Status Change Callback goes to its client, CardBIOS. Since Socket Services is not designed to have multiple clients, it is recommended that applications register as clients of CardBIOS to obtain card change events. See the CICDEMO program discussed below.

It is expected that CICDEMO will provide a sufficient illustration of Socket Services usage for most application's needs. However, complete Socket Services 1.01 documentation is available upon request (note that it is no longer available from the PCMCIA).

Here are some notes on selected HP100LX/HP200LX Socket Services functions (all this information is available by calling the appropriate Socket Services Inquire functions):

#### Inquire Adapter

```
Number of Windows                                11
Number of Sockets                                1
Number of EDCs                                   0
Capabilities: Indicators                         0
Power Management                                 0
Data Bus Width                                   1
Status Change Interrupt                          1
SCI Software Sharable                            0
SCI Hardware Sharable                            0
SC IRQ Level                                     16 (NMI), (The correct IRQ level is 6; 
                                                            but the function returns 16)
Get/Set Adapter
Attributes:
Reduce Power Consumption                                             Preserved
Preserve State Information                                           Preserved
Enable Status Change Interrupt                                       Supported
Software Share SCI                                                   Ignored
Hardware Share SCI                                                   Ignored

Inquire Window for Window Numbers 0 through 8 (memory windows)
Capabilities:
Common Memory                                                        1
Attribute Memory                                                     1
I/O Space                                                            0
EISA I/O Mappable                                                    0
Separate Enable for EISA Common Space                                0
Assignable Sockets                                                   1
EISA A15 through A12                                                 0
Supported Access Speeds:
WAIT line monitoring                                                 1
100 ns                                                               1
150 ns                                                               0
200 ns                                                               1
250 ns                                                               0
300 ns                                                               1
600 ns                                                               1
Memory Window Characteristics Table:
Capabilities:
Programmable Base Address                                            0
Programmable Window Size                                             0
Window Disable/Enable Supported                                      1
Eight-bit Data Bus Supported                                         1
Sixteen-bit Data Bus Supported                                       0
Requires Base Address Alignment on Size Boundary                     0
Power of Two Size Granularity                                        0
Requires Card Offset Alignment on Size Boundary                      0
Paging Hardware Available                                            0
Paging Hardware Shared                                               0
Page Disable/Enable Supported                                        0
I/0 Window Characteristics Table                                     None

Window Number   Base Address   Window Size             Required Card Offset Alignment
0               D0 (D000)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
1               D4 (D400)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
2               D8 (D800)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
3               DC (DC00)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
4               E0 (E000)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
5               E0 (E400)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
6               E0 (E800)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
7               E0 (EC00)      4 (16K bytes)           4 (16K byte boundary)
8               C0 (C000)      16 (64K bytes)          16 (64K byte boundary)

Inquire Window for Window Numbers 9 and 10 (I/O windows)
Capabilities
Common Memory                                          0
Attribute Memory                                       0
I/O Space                                              1
EISA I/O Mappable                                      0
Separate Enable for EISA Common Space                  0
Assignable Sockets                                     1
EISA A15 through A12                                   0
Supported Access Speeds:
WAIT line monitoring                                   1
100 ns                                                 0
150 ns                                                 0
200 ns                                                 1
250 ns                                                 0
300 ns                                                 1
600 ns                                                 1
Memory Window Characteristics Table: None
I/0 Window Characteristics Table:
Capabilities:
Programmable Base Address                              1
Programmable Window Size                               1
Window Disable/Enable Supported                        1
Eight-bit Data Bus Supported                           1
Sixteen-bit Data Bus Supported                         0
Requires Base Address Alignment on Size Boundary       0
Power of Two Size Granularity                          1
Minimum Base Address                                   0x0000
Maximum Base Address                                   0xFFFF
Minimum Window Size                                    1
Maximum Window Size                                    256
Required Window Size Granularity                       1

Inquire Socket
Capabilities:
Card Change                                            1
Card Lock                                              0
Insert Card                                            0
Eject Card                                             0
Hardware Indicators:
Busy Status                                            0
Write Protect Status                                   0
Battery Status                                         0
Card Lock Status                                       0
XIP Status                                             0
Socket Characteristics Table:
Supported Card Types:
Memory Card                                            1
I/O Card                                               1
Steerable IRQ Levels                                   3, 5, 6, 7
Additional Steerable IRQ Levels                        none
Power Management Table (two entries):
5.0 volts                                              Vcc, Vpp1, Vpp2
12.0 volts                                             Vpp1, Vpp2
```

Notes:

* Vpp1 and Vpp2 must always be the same.
* Only Ready Change and Card Detect Change interrupts are currently available. The Cougar hardware also supports interrupts from Battery Low or Dead change, but these are not being enabled. The card battery state is read every 15 seconds at the same time the main and backup batteries are measured. If the card battery is low or dead, a message is displayed.
* When a socket is configured as Memory and the Ready Change interrupt is enabled, this interrupt comes in on IRQ6.
* When the built-in applications are active, ALL of the 9 memory windows are in use for XIP code and data. The term System Manager will be used for the built-in applications.

The XIP code and data are mapped in from the System ROM. The System ROM is not controlled by Socket Services, but is instead accessed by proprietary memory mapping functions on Int 63h.

In order for the System Manager and memory cards to coexist, all utilities which access a memory card must save and restore the window(s) so that from the System Manager's point of view, the System Manager has exclusive use of the windows.

No program on the 100LX/200LX, including the System Manager, is allowed to store a hardware interrupt handler in a memory window. Thus, code such as disk drivers which do temporary mapping from a memory card, do NOT need to worry about interrupts during the time the window mapping is changed.

CardBIOS takes care of saving and restoring window mappings so it is recommended that CardBIOS be used to read/write cards whenever possible. It is hoped that this will cover the need to configure I/O cards.

* Neither of the two I/O windows are normally in use on the HP100LX/200LX. Hence, they are for exclusive use of plug-in I/O cards.

The natural address to use for a UART card is 2F8h (COM2).

I/O addresses used by built-in Cougar hardware or the automatic test system, and hence should be avoided for plug-in cards, are:

```
    20h - 21h      Interrupt controller
    22h            Hornet index register
    23h            Hornet data register
    28h            CPU power control
    29h            reserved                 
    2Ch            reserved
    2Dh            reserved                 
    40h - 43h      Programmable Interval Timer
    60h - 62h      Programmable Peripheral Interface
    300h - 307h    Possible test system parallel port
    308h - 30Fh    Possible test system UART            
    310h - 317h    Possible test system parallel port
    318h - 31Fh    Possible test system UART            
    348h - 34Fh    Possible test system UART
    358h - 35Fh    Possible test system UART
    3B0h - 3BFh    Display
    3D0h - 3DFh    Display
    3F8h - 3FFh    Built-in UART (COM1)
```

* Cougar's plug-in card bus is 8 bits. The IOIS16 pin is not used.
* The correspondence between wait states and access speed is:

```
    Access Speed                   Wait States               Estimated time (8mH) 
    100 ns (1)                     0                         117.5 ns 
    200 ns                         1                         242.5 ns 
    300 ns                         2                         367.5 ns 
    WAIT line monitoring (2)       3                         492.5 ns 
    600 ns                         4                         617.5 ns 
```

  1. Due to a hardware limitation, the wait states must be at least 1 for an I/O access. Hence, the 100 ns speed is not supported for I/O cards.
  2. Due to a hardware limitation, WAIT line monitoring does not work with fewer than 3 wait states. Thus, if WAIT line monitoring is requested, Socket Services will set 3 wait states. With 3 or more wait states, WAIT line monitoring will be active.

* The HP palmtop's wait states are associated with a chip enable (e.g., the plug-in card or System ROM) rather than being associated with a window. Hence, some extra work is done in Socket Services to attempt to avoid the potential problem where there are two windows open on the same chip enable and the two windows want different access speeds. Basically, it remembers what is requested, but it never sets fewer wait states than other enabled windows on the same chip enable.
* The Input Acknowledge (INPACK) signal is not used.
* The 5 volt supply is OFF in suspend mode. It is always ON otherwise.

## PCMCIA Wakeup

To date, there is no PCMCIA standard way defined for a card to wake up a unit. However, the HP palmtop does have a plug-in card wake up scheme on GPIO pin 6. GPIO pin 6 goes to the battery voltage detect 1 (BVD1) pin on the card, but is INVERTED in the process.

The card must have a power supply independent from the palmtop because the card will not receive any power from the palmtop when the palmtop is off.

The basic wakeup scheme is:

* The card should hold the BVD1 signal low until a wake up is desired at which time the signal should be driven high.
* The palmtop should be configured to cause an interrupt on a low signal on GPIO 6 (remember that GPIO 6 is inverted from BVD1).

Some special considerations are:

* A low signal on BVD1 means a dead card battery for memory cards and hence if the card holds this signal low, the palmtop will give low card battery messages.
* The GPIO 6 wakeup interrupt should not in general be left enabled all the time. This is because you will be unable to turn the unit off if certain types of cards are present. For example, a RAM card may cause a wakeup because a rising edge may be detected on BVD1 as the BVD1 signal decays from high (good battery) to low as power is removed from the card after turnoff. Consequently, the GPIO 6 wakeup interrupt should only be enabled on the way into deep sleep when an appropriate card is inserted.

See the example program WAKEDEMO for a skeleton of code which enables plug-in card wakeup on an HP palmtop. A RAM card can be used to demonstrate that this program is working as mentioned above.

## Example

A frequently encountered need is for an application which can recognize and configure a particular special purpose IO card, where special purpose means something other than a modem card. Recall that CIC100 handles modem cards, so these cards do not usually need any special handling.

When initially inserted and each time the palmtop is powered on, a plug-in card returns to its default state which is that of a memory card. Thus, some action is needed to enable the card's IO functions. Once the card and the host are configured for IO card operation, the card is usually accessed by some standard application software for that card. The trick is just to put the card in IO mode and create an IO window so the application can talk to the card.

The CICDEMO program was written to show how this sort of recognition and configuration can be done on the HP palmtop. CICDEMO is contained in the developer's kit.

The major features of CICDEMO are:

* It is a TSR which registers as a CardBIOS client at install time. This enables CICDEMO to receive notification of card change events so that it can watch for its special card to be inserted or removed.
* It uses CardBIOS GetTuple functions to examine each newly inserted card to see if the card is its special card.
* It uses the CardBIOS write memory function to write configuration data to its special card's attribute memory in order to configure the card for IO mode.
* It uses the Socket Services SetSocket function to configure the socket for IO operation and to enable an appropriate interrupt, when its card has been found. When the card has been removed, SetSocket is used to return the socket to generic memory card operation.
* It uses the Socket Services SetWindow function to assign an IO window of the appropriate size and location to the socket, when its card has been found. When the card has been removed, SetWindow is used to disable the IO window.
* It has an uninstall feature which demonstrates how to unregister a CardBIOS client.
